# The SENSEI workflow for measurement and verification of energy efficiency improvements

The eensight Python package accompanies the deliverable <b>D7.1 Methods for the dynamic measurement and verification of energy savings</b> of the H2020 project [SENSEI Smart Energy Services to Improve the Energy Efficiency of the European Building Stock](https://senseih2020.eu/). The goal of this deliverable is to contribute to the advancement of the automated measurement and verification (M&V) methods for energy efficiency. 

This goal raises the question of why another M&V methodology is needed in the first place. 

* The first reason is that there are only a very limited number of M&V frameworks that are ready to be tested and adopted by practitioners. Although the literature on M&V applications is extensive, the gap between: (a) presenting a methodology and its results and (b) offering the tools for practitioners to experiment with this methodology and integrate the parts that they find valuable is most often significant.

* The second reason is that no methodology can be considered a priori the best one. The interaction between any methodology and a specific building – as described by the dataset of its energy/power consumption – determines whether the methodology is suitable for this building or, from the opposite point of view, whether the building is adequately predictable given the selected methodology for M&V. Understanding the aforementioned interaction requires further work on M&V method comparisons, as well as access to a diverse set of M&V models and workflows. SENSEI contributes to the later by proposing a new M&V methodology and providing all of its methods and tools as a reproducible open source project for practitioners to experiment and test on different datasets.  

* Finally, energy efficiency improvements can only be estimated through counterfactual analysis, which leads to increased uncertainty and potential for disputes. Although there has been a lot of focus on comparing M&V methodologies according to their predictive accuracy, improving accuracy does not mitigate by itself the uncertainty; uncertainty is mainly driven by all the building’s aspects that may change over time and render the M&V model irrelevant. Accordingly, the proposed M&V methodology focuses on identifying and deconstructing the consumption patterns of a building as much as it focuses on the M&V model’s predictive accuracy. Such information is essential when the M&V model is monitored during its operation so as to verify the degree to which it remains relevant, as well as to determine what has actually changed and how a model adjustment should be guided.

Every plot and result in the deliverable is completely reproducible using the Python modules and notebooks in this repository. 

The [eda.ipynb](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/hebes-io/eensight/blob/master/notebooks/eda.ipynb) notebook presents a series of exploratory analysis steps that can be carried out so that a given dataset is better understood, as well as expectations for the corresponding building’s consumption can be formed and, later, used for evaluating the patterns that the baseline energy consumption model uncovered. It is meant to guide the implementation of dashboards and interactive visualizations for communicating insights regarding a building energy consumption dataset. 

The [day_typing.ipynb](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/hebes-io/eensight/blob/master/notebooks/day_typing.ipynb) notebook shows a replicable workflow for identifying common and uncommon patterns in daily energy consumption. The adopted approach makes no a priori assumptions regarding the daily, weekly and yearly similarities between the different observations in a building’s energy consumption data. Instead, it relies on the preprocessing stage to identify: (a) common daily energy consumption patterns – that define our expectations about the data, and (b) uncommon daily energy consumption patterns – that signify a break from these expectations. Such patterns may concern the way consumption is expected to vary according to the hour of the day and day of the week, or the way consumption is expected to vary according to the outdoor temperature.

The [predict.ipynb](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/hebes-io/eensight/blob/master/notebooks/predict.ipynb) notebook shows a workflow for training a predictive baseline model, evaluating its fitness and quantifying the uncertainty in its predictions. It also showcases how the information from the preprocessing stage can be utilized for predictive modelling, as well as the benefits from doing so. Finally, it presents a way to carry out uncertainty quantification without making any assumptions on the type of the baseline model used.
